Add documentation for task queue based scheduled events (#4299)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/refguide/modeling/resources/scheduled-events/_index.md

---
title: "Scheduled Events"
url: /refguide/scheduled-events/
parent: "resources"
weight: 80
description: "Options for configuring scheduled events"
tags: ["Scheduled Event", "Execution properties", "Timing", "intervals", "scheduling issues", "time zones", "daylight saving"]
#If moving or renaming this doc file, implement a temporary redirect and let the respective team know they should update the URL in the product. See Mapping to Products for more details.
---

## 1 Introduction

With scheduled events you can let the runtime execute a microflow at specific moments in time.

A scheduled event is added to your module as a document (right-click your module and you will find it listed under *Add other*).

{{% alert type="warning" %}}
Scheduled events can be tested locally, but they will not be run if your app is deployed as a Free App. See the Free App section of [Mendix Cloud](/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy#free-app) for more information on Free App limitations.
{{% /alert %}}

## 2 Variants

> Until Mendix 9.13.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they

Reviewer: Should be 9.12.0 (all other mentions of 9.13.0 in this document as well). Except for the mention in Migration.

Author: ```suggestion
Until Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they
```

> Until Mendix 9.13.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Until Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they
```

will not be executed if something happens to the cluster leader node. Also, these scheduled events do not support proper monthly and
yearly events and potentially suffer from a shift of one hour due to daylight saving. These 'legacy' scheduled events will be
deprecated and will no longer be supported from Mendix 10 onward.

> As of Mendix 9.13.0 scheduled events have been improved and are being executed using the [task queue](task-queue.md), providing an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events have been improved and are being executed using the [task queue](task-queue.md), providing an
```

at-least-once guarantee. They will be executed by an arbitrary node in the cluster and support monthly and yearly events properly.
Most importantly, the task queue based scheduled events no longer have a start-time, but allow specifying a particular time of day,
ensuring that they work as expected in the face of daylight saving.

Mendix 9.13.0 and above supports the following schedule types:

> * **Legacy** - the type that existing before Mendix 9.13.0; see [Legacy scheduled events](scheduled-events-legacy.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Legacy** - the type that existing before Mendix 9.12.0; see [Legacy scheduled events](scheduled-events-legacy.md)
```

* **Yearly** - an event that occurs once a year on a particular day or date and time; see [Yearly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#yearly)
* **Monthly** - an event that occurs every so many months on a particular day and time; see [Monthly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#monthly)
* **Weekly** - an event that occurs weekly on particular days and time; see [Weekly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#weekly)
* **Daily** - an event that occurs daily at a particular time; see [Daily scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#daily)
* **Hourly** - an event that occurs every so many hours; see [Hourly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#hourly)
* **Minutes** - an event that occurs every so many minutes; see [Minute scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#minutes)

## 3 Migration

> When migrating to Mendix 9.13.0 or above Studio Pro will attempt to convert legacy scheduled events into task queue based events,
> when possible. In the following cases this is not possible and manual conversion is requested:
> 
> * the event has a start-time in the future; change the start-time to a date in the past or use a task based scheduled event
> * the event has interval type Month or Year, which is translated in 31 and 365 days respectively; use the Monthly or Yearly type 
> * the event has interval type Seconds, which is no longer supported
> * the event has an interval that doesn't divide its interval type nicely, causing it to drift (e.g. every 7 minutes, causing it to 'drift' 4 minutes every hour)

Reviewer 2: We'd like to improve this part to:

```suggestion
When migrating to Mendix 9.12.0 or above Studio Pro will attempt to convert legacy scheduled events into task queue based events,
when possible. In cases where this is not possible a deprecation warning will be shown (9.12.1 and above). Right-click on the warning to see
possible options for fixing it. If none of them is suitable, you should perform the conversion manually.

The following cases cannot be migrated automatically during model conversion:

* The event is not repeating, which we'll stop supporting; remove the scheduled event or use the [Java API](task-queue#scheduling) to schedule a one-time action.
* The event has a start-time in the future, which we'll stop supporting; change the start-time to a date in the past or switch to a task queue based scheduled event.
* The event has interval type Month or Year, which is translated to 31 and 365 days respectively; use the Monthly or Yearly type instead.
* The event has interval type Seconds, which we'll stop supporting; use a schedule event with a 1-minute interval instead.
* The event has an interval that doesn't divide its interval type nicely (e.g. an event that executes every 7 minutes will execute 8 times per hour,
  with 4 minutes left, causing it to 'drift' 4 minutes every hour). If it is absolutely critical that a non-supported interval is used,
  you should schedule the event with interval value 1 (e.g. every minute) and then start your microflow with a decision that
  checks whether it should be continue executing at that particular time.
```

Author: I'll commit this suggestion, it looks good.
I still need to do a full proofread of these changes, so I'll check the language again when I do that.

Reviewer: Looks good to me.

{{% alert type="warning" %}}

> Mendix 9.13.0 and above allow legacy scheduled events to be edited, but do not allow new legacy scheduled events to be created.

Reviewer: 9.12.0

Author: ```suggestion
Mendix 9.12.0 and above allow legacy scheduled events to be edited, but do not allow new legacy scheduled events to be created.
```

> Mendix 9.13.0 and above allow legacy scheduled events to be edited, but do not allow new legacy scheduled events to be created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mendix 9.12.0 and above allow legacy scheduled events to be edited, but do not allow new legacy scheduled events to be created.
```

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
Scheduled events can be tested locally, but they will not be run if your app is deployed as a Free App. See the Free App section of [Mendix Cloud](/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/#free-app) for more information on Free App limitations.
{{% /alert %}}

## 2 Variants

Until Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they
will not be executed if something happens to the cluster leader node. Also, these scheduled events do not support proper monthly and
yearly events and potentially suffer from a shift of one hour due to daylight saving. These 'legacy' scheduled events are
deprecated and will no longer be supported from Mendix 10.

As of Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events have been improved and are being executed using the [task queue](/refguide/task-queue/), providing an
at-least-once guarantee. They will be executed by an arbitrary node in the cluster and support monthly and yearly events properly.
Most importantly, the task queue-based scheduled events no longer have a start-time, but allow specifying a particular time of day,

> ensuring that they work as expected in the face of daylight saving.

Author: From other comments it seems like this should perhaps say:
```suggestion
Most importantly, you can no longer specify a specific date and time for task queue-based scheduled events — all events will recur at the specified time, depending on the schedule you set up.
In addition, these recurring events will now work as expected in the face of daylight saving time.
```

Reviewer 2: :+1:

* **Yearly** – an event that occurs once a year on a particular day or date and at a specified time — see [Yearly scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#yearly)
* **Monthly** – an event that occurs every so many months on a particular day and at a specified time — see [Monthly scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#monthly)
* **Weekly** – an event that occurs weekly on particular days and at a specified time — see [Weekly scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#weekly)
* **Daily** – an event that occurs daily at a specified time — see [Daily scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#daily)
* **Hourly** – an event that occurs every so many hours — see [Hourly scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#hourly)
* **Minutes** – an event that occurs every so many minutes — see [Minute scheduled events](/refguide/scheduled-events-task-queue/#minutes)

## 3 Migration{#migration}

When migrating to Mendix version 9.12.0 or above, Studio Pro will attempt to convert legacy scheduled events into task queue-based events,

> when possible. In cases where this is not possible a deprecation warning will be shown. Right-click on the warning to see
> possible options for fixing it. If none of the options is suitable, you should perform the conversion manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when possible.
```

description: "Options for configuring scheduled events"
tags: ["Scheduled Event", "Execution properties", "Timing", "intervals", "scheduling issues", "time zones", "daylight saving"]
#If moving or renaming this doc file, implement a temporary redirect and let the respective team know they should update the URL in the product. See Mapping to Products for more details.
---

## 1 Introduction

With scheduled events you can let the runtime execute a microflow at specific moments in time.

A scheduled event is added to your module as a document (right-click your module and you will find it listed under *Add other*).

{{% alert type="warning" %}}
Scheduled events can be tested locally, but they will not be run if your app is deployed as a Free App. See the Free App section of [Mendix Cloud](/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy#free-app) for more information on Free App limitations.
{{% /alert %}}

## 2 Variants

Until Mendix 9.13.0 scheduled events only execute on the cluster leader node, with an at-most-once guarantee, which means that they
will not be executed if something happens to the cluster leader node. Also, these scheduled events do not support proper monthly and

> yearly events and potentially suffer from a shift of one hour due to daylight saving. These 'legacy' scheduled events will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
yearly events and potentially suffer from a shift of one hour due to daylight saving. These 'legacy' scheduled events are
```

deprecated and will no longer be supported from Mendix 10 onward.

As of Mendix 9.12.0 scheduled events have been improved and are being executed using the [task queue](task-queue.md), providing an
at-least-once guarantee. They will be executed by an arbitrary node in the cluster and support monthly and yearly events properly.

> Most importantly, the task queue based scheduled events no longer have a start-time, but allow specifying a particular time of day,

Author: I don't understand the distinction here. You still provide the time as hh:mm, and it still starts at that time? or do you now specify "morning", "afternoon", "evening", and "night"?

Author: @hugomendix - 
This needs to be published tomorrow, and I'm still not sure what you mean by "time of day" in this document.
What do you have to specify as the time, and how does that differ from an event having a "start time"?
Can you clarify here, or is it worth a quick call?

Reviewer 2: The legacy scheduled events had a start time, which was a date and a time, so effectively a point in time. The new scheduled events only have a time of day and no date, so actually just a particular time that occurs every day.

As an example:
* Legacy event - Start date/time: 2022-03-28 12:34:56 UTC
* New style event - Time: 12:34

ensuring that they work as expected in the face of daylight saving.

> Mendix 9.13.0 and above supports the following schedule types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mendix 9.12.0 and above supports the following schedule types:
```

* **Legacy** - the type that existing before Mendix 9.13.0; see [Legacy scheduled events](scheduled-events-legacy.md)
* **Yearly** - an event that occurs once a year on a particular day or date and time; see [Yearly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#yearly)
* **Monthly** - an event that occurs every so many months on a particular day and time; see [Monthly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#monthly)
* **Weekly** - an event that occurs weekly on particular days and time; see [Weekly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#weekly)
* **Daily** - an event that occurs daily at a particular time; see [Daily scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#daily)
* **Hourly** - an event that occurs every so many hours; see [Hourly scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#hourly)
* **Minutes** - an event that occurs every so many minutes; see [Minute scheduled events](scheduled-events-task-queue.md#minutes)

## 3 Migration

> When migrating to Mendix 9.13.0 or above Studio Pro will attempt to convert legacy scheduled events into task queue based events,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When migrating to Mendix 9.12.0 or above Studio Pro will attempt to convert legacy scheduled events into task queue based events,
```

> when possible. In cases where this is not possible a deprecation warning will be shown. Right-click on the warning to see

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when possible. In cases where this is not possible a deprecation warning will be shown (9.12.1 and above). Right-click on the warning to see
```

Author: Hi @hugomendix 
This PR is for 9.12.0. I don't think we should mention 9.12.1 yet.

Reviewer 2: Make sense. The thing is that the scheduled events have been redone in 9.12.0, but we did not manage to get the deprecation warnings and remedies into this version, so they will be in 9.12.1. Should I create a separate PR for that?
If so, The last 3 sentences of this paragraph ("In case where" ... "perform the conversion manually") will be moved to that PR.

Author: I think a new PR, unfortunately.
Can you do that?

Reviewer 2: Will do that after this one has been merged.

Author: Thanks for making a new PR for 9.12.1
